[docs] Prepare partitioned and non-partioned topic resources (#8388)
apache/pulsar: site2/docs/admin-api-partitioned-topics.md

---
id: admin-api-partitioned-topics
title: Managing partitioned topics
sidebar_label: Topics1
---

## Manage partitioned topics
You can use Pulsar [admin API](admin-api-overview.md) to create, update, delete and check status of partitioned topics.

### Create

Partitioned topics must be explicitly created. When creating a new partitioned topic, you need to provide a name and the number of partitions for the topic.

> By default, after 60 seconds of creation, topics are considered inactive and deleted automatically to prevent from generating trash data. To disable this feature, set `brokerDeleteInactiveTopicsEnabled` to `false`. To change the frequency of checking inactive topics, set `brokerDeleteInactiveTopicsFrequencySeconds` to your desired value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, 60 seconds after creation, topics are considered inactive and deleted automatically to avoid generating trash data. To disable this feature, set `brokerDeleteInactiveTopicsEnabled` to `false`. To change the frequency of checking inactive topics, set `brokerDeleteInactiveTopicsFrequencySeconds` as required.
```

For more information about the two parameters, see [here](reference-configuration.md#broker).

You can create partitioned topics in the following ways.
<!--DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->
<!--pulsar-admin-->
When you create partitioned topics with the [`create-partitioned-topic`](reference-pulsar-admin.md#create-partitioned-topic)
command, you need to specify the topic name as an argument and the number of partitions using the `-p` or `--partitions` flag.

```shell
$ bin/pulsar-admin topics create-partitioned-topic \
  persistent://my-tenant/my-namespace/my-topic \
  --partitions 4
```

> **Note**    

> > If a non-partitioned topic with the suffix '-partition-' followed by numeric value like 'xyz-topic-partition-10', then you can not create a partitioned topic with name 'xyz-topic', because the partitions of the partitioned topic could override the existing non-partitioned topic. To create such partitioned topic, you have to delete that non-partitioned topic first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If a non-partitioned topic with the suffix '-partition-' followed by a numeric value like 'xyz-topic-partition-10', you can not create a partitioned topic with name 'xyz-topic', because the partitions of the partitioned topic could override the existing non-partitioned topic. To create such partitioned topic, you have to delete that non-partitioned topic first.
```

<!--REST API-->
{@inject: endpoint|PUT|/admin/v2/topics/:tenant/:namespace/:topic/partitions|operation/createPartitionedTopic}

<!--Java-->
```java
String topicName = "persistent://my-tenant/my-namespace/my-topic";
int numPartitions = 4;
admin.topics().createPartitionedTopic(topicName, numPartitions);
```

<!--END_DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

### Create missed partitions

> When topic auto creation is disabled, and you have a partitioned topic without any partitions, you can use the [`create-missed-partitions`](reference-pulsar-admin.md#create-missed-partitions) command to create partitions for the topic.

Reviewer: when topics cannot be automatically created? or when auto-creation operation is disabled?

Author: yes, when you set "setAllowAutoTopicCreation" to "false", topics cannot be created automatically.

<!--DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->
<!--pulsar-admin-->
You can create missed partitions with the [`create-missed-partitions`](reference-pulsar-admin.md#create-missed-partitions) command and specify the topic name as an argument.

```shell
$ bin/pulsar-admin topics create-missed-partitions \
  persistent://my-tenant/my-namespace/my-topic \
```

<!--REST API-->
{@inject: endpoint|POST|/admin/v2/topics/:tenant/:namespace/:topic|operation/createMissedPartitions}

<!--Java-->
```java
String topicName = "persistent://my-tenant/my-namespace/my-topic";
admin.topics().createMissedPartitions(topicName);
```

<!--END_DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

### Get metadata

Partitioned topics are associated with metadata, you can view it as a JSON object. The following metadata field is available.

Field | Description
:-----|:-------
`partitions` | The number of partitions into which the topic is divided.

<!--DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->
<!--pulsar-admin-->

> You can view the number of partitions in a partitioned topic with the [`get-partitioned-topic-metadata`](reference-pulsar-admin.md#get-partitioned-topic-metadata) subcommand. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can check the number of partitions in a partitioned topic with the [`get-partitioned-topic-metadata`](reference-pulsar-admin.md#get-partitioned-topic-metadata) subcommand. 
```

Author: nice catch~

<!--Java-->
```java
admin.topics().updatePartitionedTopic(topic, numPartitions);
```

<!--END_DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

### Delete
You can delete partitioned topics with the [`delete-partitioned-topic`](reference-pulsar-admin.md#delete-partitioned-topic) command, REST API and Java. 

<!--DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->
<!--pulsar-admin-->
```shell
$ bin/pulsar-admin topics delete-partitioned-topic \
  persistent://my-tenant/my-namespace/my-topic
```

<!--REST API-->
{@inject: endpoint|DELETE|/admin/v2/topics/:topic/:namespace/:destination/partitions|operation/deletePartitionedTopic}

<!--Java-->
```java
admin.topics().delete(topic);
```

<!--END_DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

### List
You can get the list of topics under a given namespace in the following ways.  
<!--DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->
<!--pulsar-admin-->
```shell
$ pulsar-admin topics list tenant/namespace
persistent://tenant/namespace/topic1
persistent://tenant/namespace/topic2
```

<!--REST API-->
{@inject: endpoint|GET|/admin/v2/topics/:tenant/:namespace|operation/getPartitionedTopicList}

<!--Java-->
```java
admin.topics().getList(namespace);
```

<!--END_DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

### Stats

> You can view the current statistics of a given partitioned topic. The following is an example. For description of each stats, refer to [get stats](#get-stats).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can check the current statistics of a given partitioned topic. The following is an example. For description of each stats, refer to [get stats](#get-stats).
```

      "msgRateRedeliver" : 0.0,
      "chuckedMessageRate" : 0,
      "msgBacklog" : 144318,
      "msgBacklogNoDelayed" : 144318,
      "blockedSubscriptionOnUnackedMsgs" : false,
      "msgDelayed" : 0,
      "unackedMessages" : 0,
      "msgRateExpired" : 0.0,
      "lastExpireTimestamp" : 0,
      "lastConsumedFlowTimestamp" : 0,
      "lastConsumedTimestamp" : 0,
      "lastAckedTimestamp" : 0,
      "consumers" : [ ],
      "isDurable" : true,
      "isReplicated" : false
    }
  },
  "replication" : { },
  "metadata" : {
    "partitions" : 3
  },
  "partitions" : { }
}
```

You can view the current statistics of a given partitioned topic and its connected producers and consumers in the following ways. 

<!--DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->
<!--pulsar-admin-->
```shell
$ pulsar-admin topics partitioned-stats \
  persistent://test-tenant/namespace/topic \
  --per-partition
```

<!--REST API-->
{@inject: endpoint|GET|/admin/v2/topics/:tenant/:namespace/:topic/partitioned-stats|operation/getPartitionedStats}

<!--Java-->
```java
admin.topics().getPartitionedStats(topic, true /* per partition */, false /* is precise backlog */);
```

<!--END_DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

### Internal stats

> You can view the detailed statistics of a topic. The following is an example. For description of each stats, refer to [get internal stats](#get-internal-stats).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can check the detailed statistics of a topic. The following is an example. For description of each stats, refer to [get internal stats](#get-internal-stats).
```

same comments for the following, please check through the whole doc updates.
